---
layout: post
title: My favorite way of injecting dependencies in Scala
tags:
 - Scala
 - Dependency injection
---

The following post is a shorter version of a post I've published on my former blog, Coffeebean.
In this article, we will focus on dependency injection with only pure Scala code (no framework involved), resolved at compile time.

There are many ways to inject dependencies in Scala, this is my current favorite way of doing it.

In our example, we have a Play app with a controller. But this kind of wiring would work with any Scala application.

We provide a route to find Internet links from a query string. To achieve this we will rely on the DuckDuckGO API. But for tests we would like to mock this service. As we want to be able to test our controllers, we need to be able to inject our service into the controller. To add a little more fun, the link service depends on a logging service.

## The Piece of Cake Pattern

The first thing to do is to define a ServicesComponent trait. This trait will embed our services :

{% highlight scala %}
class LogService{
  import play.api.Logger

  def log(message: String) {
    Logger.info(message)
  }
}

class LinkService(logService: LogService){
  import play.api.libs.ws.WS

  def findLinks(query: String) = {
    val duckDuckUrl = Play.current.configuration.getString("duckduck.url").getOrElse("http://api.duckduckgo.com/?format=json&q=") + query
    WS.url(duckDuckUrl).get.map{ response =>
      val results = response.json \\ "FirstURL"
      //take first result if exists
      val result = results.mkString(", ")
      logService.log("found links : " + result)
      result
    }
  }
}

trait ServicesComponent{
  val logService = new LogService
  val linkService = new LinkService(logService)
}

{% endhighlight %}


Now the controller can extend this trait to get dependencies from it :

{% highlight scala %}
trait ApplicationController extends Controller {
  this : ServicesComponent =>

  def findLinks(query: String) = Action.async {
    val links = linkService.findLinks(query)
    links.map(response => Ok(views.html.index(response)))
  }

}

object Application extends ApplicationController with ServicesComponent
{% endhighlight %}

this : ServicesComponent => in the ApplicationController trait means that we need a ServicesComponent dependency. 

Play uses objects to wire routes to controllers. At the end of the sample code above, we create the Application instance that will embed the services by extension of the ServicesComponent trait.

This is a very light version of the cake pattern. The cake pattern is often accused of getting too big too fast and being hard to manage.
But here, I use only one layer and traits only where they are needed. Everything is wired in the ServicesComponent trait.

If we want to wire another version of a service, for example for tests, we just need to extend the ServicesComponent trait and override the value :

{% highlight scala %}
class ControllerSpec extends Specification with Mockito {

  trait MockServices extends ServicesComponent {
    override val logService = mock[LogService]
    override val linkService = {
      val mockLinkService = mock[LinkService]
      mockLinkService.findLinks("hello") returns Future("http://coucou.com")
      mockLinkService
    }
  }

  "Application" should {

    "display query results" in {

      object Application extends ApplicationController with MockServices
      val response = Application.findLinks("hello")(FakeRequest())
      status(response) must equalTo(OK)
      contentType(response) must beSome("text/html")
      contentAsString(response) must contain("http://coucou.com")

    }
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}

That’s all!

And you, what's your favorite way of injecting dependencies in Scala?
